Some Fundamental Principles Relating to Ethics
1.0	What is ethics?
There are two kinds of statements: normative and descriptive. A descriptive statement is one to the effect that such and such is the case. Descriptive statements don’t express value-judgments. Examples of such statements are “Smith is over 6-feet tall” and “grass is green.”
A normative statement is one that does express a value-judgment; such a statement is one to the effect that such and such falls either short of, or satisfies, or exceeds some standard or norm. Examples are “it was evil of Hitler to commit genocide,” “it is wrong to steal,” “it is commendable to give money to charity,” “Smith was acting valiantly in saving the drowning toddler.”
A normative category is one that occurs only in normative judgments. Examples of such categories are good, bad, just, unjust, valiant, noble, wicked, depraved, commendable, and condemnable. Ethics is the discipline that attempts to clarify the structures of these concepts—that attempts to state as clearly as possible the conditions that things must satisfy to fall under them. So ethics attempts to make explicit exactly what conditions an act must satisfy to be praiseworthy or that an institution must satisfy to be just.
2.0	Two kinds of goodness: instrumental and intrinsic
The most important normative terms are “good” and “bad.” But here we must be careful. For each of these terms is ambiguous—that is, each has more than one meaning, and each has both normative and non-normative (descriptive) meanings. Let us start with the word “good.”
There are two kinds of goodness: instrumental good and intrinsic good. To say that an act is instrumentally good is to say that it has consequences that are desired by, or to the advantage of, the agent. (The agent is the person who commits the act.) So if my sole objective is to make money, it is instrumentally good, at least as far as my interests are concerned, to steal a million dollars from a local orphanage (provided that I don’t get caught or otherwise get into trouble for doing so). So stealing money from the orphanage is instrumentally good. That is to say, it is useful: it has consequences that are to my advantage; it is in my practical interest to act in that way.
At the same time, of course, stealing money from a charity is not ethically good. It is good only in a practical, instrumental sense. It is not good in a non-instrumental sense.
If something is good in a non-instrumental sense, it is intrinsically good. Ethics is concerned with intrinsic goodness. It attempts to answer the question “which things are intrinsically good?”  Ethics is not interested in instrumental (i.e., strategic or pragmatic) goodness. Ethics is not interested in identifying ways that thieves can steal more or ways that crooked politicians can acquire more power. Ethics is interested in identifying those courses of action, and those states of affairs, that are good even if their consequences are disregarded.
There are many views as to which things have intrinsic value. But here are some things that many ethicists, though not all, believe to fall into that category: happiness, intelligence, benevolence, honesty (both with oneself and with others), loyalty, pleasure, life (being alive is a good thing, even though life has its less-than-stellar moments), friendship, compassion, enthusiasm for one’s work and for life in general, and freedom. It should be pointed out that there are different kinds of freedom: there is freedom from external, physical coercion (this is the kind of freedom one has in virtue of not being in a jail cell); there is emotional freedom (this is the kind of freedom one has in virtue of not being dominated by internal, psychological compulsion); and there is also intellectual freedom (this is the kind of freedom one has by virtue of being able 
 
to figure things out for oneself, as opposed to slavishly relying on hearsay). I leave it open whether there are other kinds of freedom. 
Helping a person in need, in cases where doing so is not to one’s own practical advantage, is intrinsically good. Having an expansive consciousness is intrinsically good. Playing a musical instrument is intrinsically good. (It is also instrumentally good—no pun intended—since, as psychologists have recently discovered, it promotes neural plasticity.) Being honest with people, when it would be more convenient to lie, is intrinsically good.
I wish to emphasize that it would be hard to find two ethicists who were in complete agreement as to which things were intrinsically good. But the tentative, and perhaps partial, list just given makes it clear what, at least approximately, is meant by the expression “intrinsic good.”
2.1	Instrumental and intrinsic goodness not mutually exclusive
Having a sharp intellect is both an intrinsic good and an instrumental good. Having intelligence is an instrumental good, since it can obviously improve one’s strategic position and, more generally, can have good consequences. But the goodness of being intelligent exceeds any practical advantage that it might bring to one. What we just said about intelligence is true of happiness, of pleasure, of friendship, and of honesty. All of these things can be instrumental goods, since they can have good consequences. (Of course, they can also have bad consequences: sometimes the worst thing you can do is be honest. But, undeniably, honest is sometimes an instrumental good: in general, if people know you’re truthful, they’re more likely to help you out.) At the same time, all of these things are good in and of themselves. To take another example: being happy tends to give one the confidence to act in ways that are to one’s strategic advantage. But the value of happiness obviously exceeds the strategic advantages it may bring one. Bottom line: something can be both instrumentally and intrinsically good.
3.0	More meanings of the word “good’: goodness vs. commendableness, badness vs. condemnableness
We just saw that the expression “good” is ambiguous between “instrumental good” and “intrinsic good.” But the expression “intrinsic good” is itself ambiguous. (It is common in philosophy to encounter ambiguities within ambiguities.) Some things that are intrinsically good are commendable—that is, they deserve praise. And some things that are intrinsically good do not deserve praise. In, fact, as we’ll soon see, some intrinsic goods, paradoxical though it may sound, deserve censure—that is they are to be disapproved of.
For example, happiness is intrinsically good, as we just noted. Of course, being happy may have good consequences. But a person’s happiness has a goodness that cannot be identified with the good consequences, if any there be, that it brings to that person. 
But does a happy person necessarily deserve praise for being happy? Supposing that Smith is somebody who is just naturally chipper, it’s obviously a good thing—nay, an intrinsically good thing—that Smith is in good spirits. The more happiness, the better, after all. But Smith doesn’t necessarily deserve any praise for being happy. It could be he is just naturally happy and that he doesn’t have to make any special effort or do anything particularly estimable, to remain happy or, if he happens to become blue, to become happy again. Of course, it’s possible that Smith has to commit noble deeds to be happy—that he’s deeply depressed unless he has recently done something good. It’s possible, for example, that Smith will fall into a deep depression unless he has just saved the life of a drowning child or helped a child learn to read, or some such. But it’s also possible—and, if Smith is like most people, fairly probable—that his being happy is not in general a consequence of his doing something praiseworthy. Maybe Smith’s endocrinal system just happens to manufacture happy hormones all the time; maybe Smith is happy because he’s very shrewd at sidestepping the various social and professional landmines that less cunning people are likely to step on; maybe Smith is evil and he has found a way to commit evil acts, and thus to make himself happy, without getting in trouble. There are a lot of reasons why 
 
Smith might be happy. And, undeniably, Smith’s happiness is a good thing. But it is by no means something that is in all cases praiseworthy.
To take a more stark example, the happiness of a rabbit is a good thing. But, given their cognitive limitations, rabbits are not capable of acting in a praiseworthy manner. To be sure, it’s good that they’re happy (when they’re happy). But, good though a rabbit’s happiness is, the rabbit doesn’t deserve praise for being happy—it isn’t in the same category as Gandhi or Mother Teresa. So happiness is non-instrumentally good, while at the same time not being commendable. (“Commendable” is a synonym for “praiseworthy.”)
But, of course, some intrinsically good things are praiseworthy. Suppose that Jones spends a great deal of time and energy working for a charity and that he does so knowing he does not reap any kind of practical benefit from his labors. Jones’ behavior is obviously praiseworthy—that is, it is commendable, and it is also intrinsically good.
Another example: Suppose that Smith is a naturally talented musician who plays the piano very well. Suppose, in fact, that Smith is blessed with so much native talent that he never had to work hard to play the piano well—it just came to him naturally. Smith’s musical talent is intrinsically good, as is the happiness it brings him. But Smith doesn’t deserve any praise for happening to have been blessed with this talent. (How could he deserve praise for the occurrence of something over which he has no control?) It’s good that he has such talent. But he doesn’t deserve to be praised for it in the way in which Mother Teresa deserves to be praised for her good works.
Bottom line: there are two kinds of intrinsic goods—those which are commendable and those which are not.
3.1	Two kinds of intrinsic badness
Just as there are two kinds of intrinsic goodness, so there are two kinds of intrinsic badness.
It’s obviously bad to be unhappy. And the badness in question is clearly of a non-instrumental, and therefore intrinsic, nature. In any case, even if unhappiness is instrumentally bad (i.e., even if it has bad consequences for those who suffer from it) it is also, quite clearly, bad in and of itself: being unhappy is bad even if it doesn’t bring about misfortunes other than happiness. So even in cases where unhappiness has bad consequences (e.g., it might weaken one’s immune system or alienate potential benefactors), it is also, in such cases, intrinsically bad.
At the same time, one does not, at least not in all cases, deserve to be censured for being unhappy. Somebody who is grieving the loss of a loved one doesn’t deserve to be reprimanded for having that emotion. If anything, if somebody failed to grieve the loss of a loved one, they ought to be censured for that. (Only a monster would feel nothing in response to the death of a beloved child or spouse.)
That said, some intrinsically bad things obviously do warrant censure (i.e., they are condemnable). Causing somebody else to suffer, for no good reason, is intrinsically bad and it is condemnable.
Bottom line: some, but not all, intrinsically bad things warrant censure (i.e., are condemnable); and, therefore, “intrinsically bad” is not, at least not always, identical with “worthy of condemnation.”
4.0	The morally complex structure of some situations
A single act or state of affairs can be intrinsically good in one respect and intrinsically bad in some other respect. Suppose that I am playing the piano, that I’m doing so very well, and that I’m taking pleasure in it. Surely that is an intrinsic good. But suppose that, because I’m playing the piano, I am waking up my very sick roommate, who needs his sleep, and that I am aware of the harm that I am doing to my roommate. In that case, my piano playing, though an intrinsic good, is condemnable. It is wrong, but it is also intrinsically good. This may seem like a paradox, but it isn’t. The reason it isn’t a paradox is that, as we’ll see in a moment, “wrong” is not the opposite of “good”; in other words, wrongness is not the absence of goodness. And this is closely related to another fact that we’ll soon discuss, namely, that “right” is not identical with “good.” 
 
A given act can be both condemnable and commendable. Suppose that Jones, who is an exceptionally tough and vindictive fellow, insults Smith and that Green, who is a friend of Smith’s, savagely beats Jones to avenge Smith’s honor. (Let us assume that Green’s act is motivated only by loyalty to Smith and there is no element of self-interest in it.) Green’s act is commendable, because it is an act of loyalty and courage. But it is also condemnable, because it is an act of excessive and unnecessary violence.
5.0	The non-privative character of moral attributes
Despite what first appearances might suggest, there is nothing paradoxical about the fact that a given act can be both commendable and condemnable. This is because for something to have the property of being commendable is not for it to lack the property of condemnable, and for something to have the property of being condemnable is not for it to lack the property of commendable. Neither property is “privative”; they are both “positive” properties. A “privative” property is one that a thing has when it’s missing something. A “positive” property is one that a thing has when it has an extra something.
For something to be cold is for it to lack heat. For something to be dumb is for it to lack intelligence. For something to be poor is for it to lack money. To be dumb or cold or poor is to lack something. There are many properties like this: in other words, where many properties are concerned, having them is identical with failing to have some other property.
A property that is not privative is “positive.” For something to be hot or smart or rich is not for it to lack anything. On the contrary, it is for it to have something. That is why these are “positive,” as opposed to “privative,” properties. Another illustration: for a drink to be sugary is for it to have something extra in it. That is why the property of being sugary is positive, as opposed to privative. By contrast, for a drink to be sugar-free is for it to fail to have something; that is why the property of being sugar-free is privative, as opposed to positive.
The property of being condemnable is not privative; it is a positive property. (It is, of course, not positive in the moral sense. It is positive in a strictly logical sense that has no specific connection to morality.) Just as the property of being poisonous is in no way privative and is therefore a positive property (in the relevant, strictly logical sense of the word “positive”), so the property of being condemnable is in no way privative and is therefore a positive property (same qualification). And the property of being commendable is also positive. Thus, the presence of neither property is identical with the absence of some other property; more specifically, the presence of neither is identical with the absence of the other. That is why both properties can be present in some one thing (in some one act or state of affairs), which is why a given act can be both commendable and condemnable.
People tend to describe acts as either “good” or “bad,” and they have a certain resistance to characterizing them as both good and bad. This, I think, is partly because people make the mistake of thinking that badness is the absence of goodness. It is not: badness, like goodness, is the presence of something. A rock lacks goodness. But rocks aren’t bad. They’re neither good nor bad. To be bad, it isn’t enough to lack something; one must have something extra. Hitler was bad. And he was bad because he had something that rocks don’t have—he had ill-will and a willingness to act on it. So it wasn’t Hitler’s lacking something that made him bad. On the contrary, it was his having an extra something that did so. To sum up, people tend to think that good and bad cannot co-exist in the same person, or the same act, because they wrongly think that good is the absence of bad and that badness is the absence of good.
But there is another, probably more important reason why people fail to appreciate the highly ambiguous nature of morality. People tend, especially where moral and emotional issues are concerned, to think in an unrealistically binary way. If I had to hazard a guess as to why this is so, it would be that it’s simply easier—less demanding of energy, intelligence, and reflection—to describe other people either as monsters or as heroes, and that it is therefore easier to take very simple and uniform positions with respect to their actions. (Also, by thinking in binary terms, one shields oneself from ugly and painful realities about oneself and about others. It's emotionally easier to see the world as divided into saints and ghouls than it is to see everyone, including oneself, as part-ghoul, part-saint.) In any case, what is important here is that this desire for simplicity, whatever its psychological basis, is not consistent with the actual moral structure of most acts. 
 
6.0	A corollary of the non-binary nature of moral attributes: Moral obligations have a dimension of weight
Moral obligations are not “binary”; they come in degrees. And some obligations are therefore stronger than others. If I promise to meet you for lunch, I have an obligation to show up. But that obligation is not as strong as my obligation to show up to the classes that I’m paid by this university to teach. And the latter obligation is not as strong as the President’s obligation to serve the interests of his 300 million constituents.
A related point is that there are degrees of wrongness. It is wrong of me not to show up to a lunch date I promised to show up to; it is more wrong of me not to show up to a class I’m supposed to teach; and it is even more wrong for a head of state to violate the trust of his constituents.
6.1	For one moral obligation to outweigh another is not for it to cancel it
Oftentimes, we have conflicting obligations. The following story will make this clear. My best friend, who has always been kind to me, has one million dollars in a safe to which I have access. Of course, I have a moral obligation not to steal that money; for, were I to steal it, I’d be harming somebody who’s been very decent to me, and also violating that person’s trust in me. Unfortunately, I may not have the option of honoring this moral obligation. I have five young children, all of whom desperately need to undergo very expensive medical treatment. By the time I could legitimately make the money needed to fund their treatment, they would have died, and the only way to get my hands on the needed funds is to steal my best friend’s money. So I have a choice: steal the money or let me children die. There is no third option.
I obviously have a moral obligation—one that is even stronger than my obligation not to steal my friend’s money—to get them the care that they need. I’m in a real jam here. If I steal my friend’s money, I’m violating his trust and friendship. If I don’t steal his money, I’m violating my responsibility to help my children.
Under the circumstances, the right thing to do—that is, the least bad thing, the lesser of two evils—is to steal the money. After all, the moral value of saving five children exceeds the moral value of not stealing my friend’s money. But that doesn’t mean that my obligation not to steal my friend’s money ceases to exist. It does still exist. In stealing from my friend, I am doing something to him that he has a right not to undergo and that I therefore have an obligation not to make happen. Basically, obligations that are outweighed by other, more powerful obligations do not on that account cease to exist.
6.2	“right” ≠ “good”, “right” = “least bad”
Under the circumstances described a moment ago, the “right” thing to do is to steal my friend’s money, the reason being that, if I don’t do this, my children will die. But stealing my friend’s money is clearly the lesser of two evils. In other words, it is a bad thing, a terrible thing—but the alternative is even worse. So what makes it right to steal my friend’s money is not that doing so is a positive good; it is that doing so is the least bad option available under the circumstances. In general, what we mean by “the right course of action” is the least bad course of action that the circumstances permit.
6.3	“wrong” ≠ “bad”, “wrong” = “least good”
For similar reasons, the “wrong” thing to do is not necessarily a bad thing to do. For a course of action to be wrong is for it to be the least good possible course of action. Suppose that I am in a situation where, for some reason or other, there are only three possible courses of action available to me: (i) I can save the lives of individuals M1 . . . M10; (ii) I can save the lives of individuals M11 . . . M15; (iii) I can save the lives of individuals M16–M17. In other words, my choices are (i) save 10 people, but let 7 people die; (ii) save 5 people, but let 12 people die; or save 1 person, but let 16 people die.  (Let us suppose that the individuals composing any one of
 
these groups are no better or worse, no more and no less worthy of life, than the individuals composing either of the other two groups.) If I save the lives of M16–M17, I am obviously doing a good thing; for it is obviously good to save lives. But I’m still doing the wrong thing, since it would obviously be better to save M1 . . . M10. After all, the more people saved, the better (assuming, as we are, that the relevant individuals are all of comparable value).
7.0	“Ought” implies “can”
It is a generally accepted principle of ethics that one has an obligation to do something only if one can do it. One ought to do something only if one can do it—“ought” implies “can.” Here’s the idea. Because it isn’t within my power to heal every sick person on the planet, I have no obligation do so; and I have an obligation to treat my students fairly only because it is within my power to do so.
There is much truth in the principle that “ought” implies “can.” But, in light of what we said a moment ago, this principle must be taken with a grain of salt. We saw that there are circumstances where one has multiple conflicting obligations—where one has an obligation to X and Y and Z, but where it isn’t possible for one to do all of those things. Under such circumstances, one ought to do something (namely, X and Y and Z) that one cannot do, showing it isn’t strictly correct to say that “ought” implies “can.”
But that principle has not been proven completely false. For, under the circumstances just described, there is no single course of action that one ought to carry out that it isn’t within one’s power to carry out. It is in my power not to steal my friend’s money (even though it’s not in my power to discharge that obligation and my obligation to save my children); and it does seem that, if that conditions weren’t met, I wouldn’t have an obligation not to steal my friend’s money.
8.0	Legality ≠ morality
There are, or at least can be, acts which are legal, even legally required, which are immoral. In this country, before the Civil War, it was legal to have slaves, and it was illegal to set another person’s slaves free. But it is exceedingly immoral to have slaves and exceedingly moral to set slaves free.
At the same time, legality and morality often overlap. It is illegal to kill people (except in self-defense), and it’s also immoral to do so (same qualification). It is a delicate question how exactly legality and morality are related. See Chapter 27 for a discussion of this issue.
9.0	The moral status of passing judgment on X ≠ to the moral status of X itself
Given only that some object in fact weighs 200 pounds, I don’t necessarily know, or therefore have the right to say, that it has that weight. After all, I might not have enough information to make that judgment. Given only that some statement is correct, I don’t necessarily have the right to make it. I have that right only if I have good reason to believe that it is correct. And I may simply not have enough evidence to make that call.
This principle has an important ethical consequence. Jones, let us suppose, is on trial for a murder that he in fact committed. But the jury doesn’t have enough information to convict Jones. The jury just doesn’t know whether Jones is guilty. Jones’ act is condemnable. Murder is wrong, after all. But the jury doesn’t know that Jones committed murder; and the jury therefore doesn’t have the right to convict Jones. It would be condemnable of the jury to do so. It is wrong to convict a person that one doesn’t know to be guilty, even if that person is guilty.
For similar reasons, even if an act is condemnable, one doesn’t necessarily have the right to describe it as such. One has that right only if one has sufficient information about the act. If, without having such information,
 
one condemns it, then one is oneself acting condemnably; for one is making an accusation that one doesn’t know to be correct, even though, by coincidence, it is correct. Bottom line: it can be condemnable to condemn the condemnable.
10.0	The goodness of the act vs. the goodness of the agent
Whether somebody deserves to be commended for an act depends, not on whether it actually was the right act, but on whether it was the agent’s intention to perform the right act. And whether somebody deserves to be reprimanded for an act depends, not on whether it actually was the wrong act, but on whether it was the agent’s intention to perform the wrong act.
Suppose that Kathy is a very decent person who is a mother of five. Because she’s read all the right parenting magazines, she knows that feeding her children nutritional supplement X will make them healthy, happy, etc. So, even though X is expensive, she works extra hours, buys it, and feeds it to her children. And, as a result, they are happy, healthy, etc.
Obviously Kathy deserves commendation. She did the right thing; moreover, it was her intention to do so—that is, it didn’t happen by accident.
Now let’s consider a different case. Like Kathy, Mary is a mother of five who wants to benefit her children and reads all the right parenting magazines. Given the evidence at Mary’s disposal, the most reasonable conclusion for her to draw is that she should feed nutritional supplement Y to her children. It’s expensive; but Mary works extra hours to pay for it. And she buys it and feeds it to her kids. Bottom line: Mary is psychologically just like Kathy. Her intentions are exactly the same as Kathy’s. So far, so good.
But there’s a problem. It turns out that, despite all the advertising and the FDA-run tests, Y is lethal. (It doesn’t kill instantly, taking years to do so, and that is why it wasn’t previously realized how dangerous it was.) So, after a couple of years, all of Mary’s children die.
It’s obvious that Mary didn’t do “the right thing.” In other words, she didn’t act in a way that maximized human welfare and minimized violations of human rights. But is Mary morally worse than Kathy? In other words, is Mary to be judged more harshly than Kathy? In fact, is Mary any less worthy of praise than Kathy?
No. Mary’s intentions are exactly like Kathy’s. The difference between the two is that Mary, through no fault of her own, was fed faulty information. Mary, like Kathy, did everything she could to bring about a morally optimal outcome. The difference between Mary and Kathy is that, while the world met Kathy half-way, it didn’t meet Mary half-way. For that reason, they are equally worthy of praise, even though the one, but not the other, made something happen that should not have happened.
Third case scenario: Betty is a mother of five. Her intention is to kill her children. (She finds that being a mother is boring and wants to be done with it.) On the basis of careful research, she concludes that feeding her children substance Z will kill them and, moreover, won’t be detectable by forensic scientists. (Z is a toxic powder that looks and tastes like sugar.) So she feeds Z to her children. But what the researchers didn’t know, and what Betty therefore never found out, is that, although Z is usually fatal, it has extremely positive health effects when consumed by children of a certain very rare blood type. Betty’s children happen to be of this blood type. So, because they consume Z, they live happily ever after.
Betty brought about a good state of affairs—one where everybody (except herself) was happy. But does Betty deserve praise? No. In fact, Betty clearly deserves condemnation of the most severe kind. But how can that be, given that she brought about a good state of affairs? Because, even though she ended up doing good, it was not her intention to do so. It was her intention to do evil. So she deserves no praise and in fact deserves condemnation.
Thus, whether an agent deserves praise or censure depends, not on what she or he in fact brings about, but on what it is her/his intention to bring about. 
 
11.0	Why many legal systems (including ours) punish attempted crimes less severely than successfully carried out crimes
Attempted murder is punished less severely than actual murder. Why? Because failure to carry a plan out successfully oftentimes (though not always) suggests that the person’s heart wasn’t really in it. If Smith is a smart guy who flunks out of law school 10 times, it’s a distinct possibility that Smith’s heart isn’t really in it. If somebody tries to commit murder but fails, it’s a possibility that he was of two minds about it. And that might explain why Smith failed to carry out the crime. When he pulled the trigger, let us suppose, his gun jammed. But his gun wouldn’t have jammed if, before trying to commit the crime, he had made sure that it worked. Had it been Smith’s resolute intention to carry out the crime, then he might, very possibly, have made sure that his gun did work. And, supposing that Smith did in fact have reservations about committing the murder, it’s a distinct possibility that those reservations were of a moral nature. (It’s also possible, of course, that those reservations were of a purely strategic nature.)
So failure to carry out a crime sometimes, though obviously not always, results from a certain unwillingness to go through with it; and such an unwillingness sometimes, though not always, results from moral reservations that one has about the crime.
The reason, therefore, why the criminal justice system does not punish would-be murderers as severely as actual murderers is that would-be murderers oftentimes are not as intent on committing murder as actual murderers. So the criminal justice system’s position here is consistent with the view, argued for previously, that it is agent’s intention, as opposed to the result of that intention, that determines how he ought to be judged.
For similar reasons, failure to go through with some projected good deed may show that one does not really want to perform it. Let us suppose that you agree to visit your ailing aunt, who loves your company but who you find extremely tiresome. Every time you are scheduled to visit her, there is some kind of problem. You lose your car keys. You are overwhelmed by a desire to clean your house. You finally find the inspiration to write the first chapter of your novel. These problems are real: you really do lose your car keys; you really do, at long last, know how to begin your novel; and so on. And you are not responsible, at least not consciously, for any of these last-minute problems. They just seem to spring up. Nonetheless, the fact that they always do spring up, taken together with the fact that you really hate visiting your aunt, is suggestive. It suggests that, deep down, you don’t want to visit your aunt. It suggests that your intention to visit your aunt is a feeble one.
This explains why people who succeed in carrying out projected good deeds are given more commendation than those who simply attempt to carry them out. Failure to carry out a good deed often (though not always) results from a lack of willingness to carry it out—from, in other words, an insufficiently resolute good intention. At some level, people are aware of this fact, that being why would-be do-gooders receive less commendation than actual do-gooders.
So while it’s true, as we saw in the previous section, that two people who have precisely the same intentions deserve precisely the same amount of praise or blame, even if one of them succeeds in carrying out his intentions and the other fails, it’s still probably a good idea, as a general rule, to punish attempted murderers, arsonists, etc., less severely than their successful counterparts. For, in general, those who successfully carry out these crimes are less conflicted about whether they want to succeed in their nefarious endeavors.
12.0	Aren’t there people who are to be condemned even though it is their intention to do good?
It is generally agreed that Hitler’s acts were wrong and that Hitler deserves to be condemned for them. “But,” it is often asked, “wasn’t it nonetheless Hitler’s intention to do good? His efforts were, of course, misguided. But that doesn’t mean that he didn’t have good intentions. And, supposing that he did have good intentions, isn’t that inconsistent with your [Prof. Kuczynski’s] point that it is on the basis of one’s intentions, not one’s deeds, that one deserves condemnation?” 
 
My response is that it pretty clearly was not Hitler’s intention to do good. (In any case, if he did have such an intention, it was grossly outweighed by other intentions.) Obviously when he was giving speeches, he didn’t say “it’s my intention to do evil. Thanks a lot, you’ve been a great crowd.” But that tells us nothing about what his intentions really were. And given how obvious it is to anyone of normal, or even minimal, intelligence that gratuitous torture and murder are wrong, it’s not feasible to suppose that, as a rule, Hitler’s intentions were good ones.
13.0	Can one act immorally towards oneself?
This is a controversial issue; but my feeling is “yes.” One can sell oneself short; one act self-destructively. One can do things to oneself that it is one’s right not to undergo.
There are many ways to do this: being too easy on oneself (permitting oneself every kind of excess imaginable: drugs, binge-eating, etc.); being too hard on oneself (pushing oneself too hard, setting excessively high standards). This list is far from complete. 
This is not to say that people who hurt themselves are ethically in the same category as people who hurt others. People who hurt themselves are often (though by no means always) hyper-principled, whereas people who hurt others are often (though by no means always) lacking in principle.
“But you just said that people who hurt themselves are behaving immorally. And that is surely inconsistent with your statement that such people are, at least sometimes, hyper-principled.” Given only that an act is principle-driven, it doesn’t follow that it isn’t wrong or even evil. There are many kinds of ethical principles—and not all of them are good. For example, some people felt that it was their ethical duty to support Hitler, no matter what. This was an ethical principle—it just wasn’t a good one. By acting in accordance with similarly misguided ethical principles, people may hurt themselves.
It seems true, as a general rule, that people who hurt others deserve to be punished, whereas those who hurt themselves do not. It is concluded from this that self-destructive behavior is not immoral, even though it may be bad in some other way.
This argument is less than probative. Whether somebody deserves punishment is not a function solely of whether they’ve done wrong. If the good done by punishing someone is grossly outweighed by the bad that it does, then it may, at least in some cases, be ethically wrong to punish them. Suppose that little Timmy stole a cookie. It was not good of him to do this. But suppose that, because of difficult life circumstances, little Timmy is emotionally very fragile and needs TLC (tender loving care), and that, if punished, he would completely break down. Under this circumstance, it would probably be better to give him a pass.
If we were to punish people who are already hurting themselves—who are already punishing themselves—we’d be adding insult to injury. First of all, self-destructive behavior is its own punishment; so an externally-imposed punishment would be redundant. Second, by punishing such a person, we’d be violating their autonomy (their right to determine their own fate), which might be ethically worse than they did.
In Chapter 22, it is argued that after a fashion all acts of immorality are acts of immorality towards oneself.
14.0	Some metaethical principles
Metaethics is the discipline that says what, if anything, ethical statements mean. A “valuative” statement is one that expresses a value-judgment; that is, it is one that says something should (or should not) be done, or that something is (or is not) good. Basically “valuative” means the same thing as “ethical” or “having ethical content.”
We’ll now discuss six metaethical principles. Principles 4–6 are correct; principle 3 is approximately, though perhaps not exactly, correct; and principles 1 and 2 are false, even though they are very popular to this day. 
 
14.1	You can’t derive an “ought” from an “is”
This means that, if you had a list of all the true non-valuative statements, you could not, on that basis, justifiably make any valuative statements. You could not say “it is obligatory that you do (or not do) x.”
Though widely accepted, this principle may well be false. According to one widely accepted moral doctrine, “x is a good act” means that x makes people happier than the alternative possible courses available. According to another moral doctrine, it means that x promotes the actualization of human potential to a greater degree than the alternative possible courses of action available.”
If either of these doctrines, or anything at all like either of them, is on target, then an “ought” can be inferred from “is,” since “x is what ought to be done” can be inferred from “x is more likely than the other possible courses of action to maximize happiness/the actualization of human potential.”
14.2	Moore’s “open question” argument
Moore argued that, no matter how many truths of a purely descriptive, non-moral nature you know, you don’t have enough information to make any moral judgments.
Here is his argument. Premise: No matter how many valuative truths you know about x, it remains an “open question” whether x is good or not. Conclusion: Ethical truths are not identical with, or otherwise “reducible to,” factual statements.
Analysis of Moore’s argument: Premise 1, as we just saw, is false. (In any case, it is false if there is any truth to the thesis that acts are good to the extent that they maximize happiness or enable people to develop their inborn potential.)
In any case, Premise 1 is deeply implausible. If I know that x is a person who kills others for fun and delights in their pain and never does anything for anybody, then it is not an open question whether x is good. Bottom line: Moore’s argument is no good.
14.2.1	Commentary on the last two principles
If Jones tortures babies for fun, feels no remorse about it, frames somebody else for his misdeeds, etc., Jones’ acts, and Jones himself, are obviously bad. So why did Moore think that, even if we have all of this information, it’s an “open question” whether Jones’ acts are good or bad?
I think it’s because, like many other philosophers, Moore didn’t have a very good grasp of the concept of entailment. It’s often said that P entails Q only if there is nothing in Q that isn’t in P. Entailment, it is said, is “non-ampliative.” It doesn’t add to what you know.
But this is false. Entailment is ampliative. To be sure there are some cases where it isn’t (e.g., “if P and Q, then Q”), but these are more the exception than the rule. The fact that 1 + 1 = 2 entails that there are continuous functions that cannot be differentiated at any point. It also entails that space is metrically amorphous. This is not to mention that, if we were barred from making deductions, it would be impossible to organize our raw experiences into organized theories. So if it were really true that deduction doesn’t increase knowledge, it would follow that people who draw inferences know no more than those who don’t and just live in the moment—that our Pleistocene ancestors are as knowledgeable as we are. But that’s absurdities. And yet the conception of entailment underlying Moore’s argument, as well as Hume’s, generates precisely these absurdities. See Appendix 1, Sections 3.1–3.9 for a discussion of why, contrary to what is often said in textbooks on critical thinking, entailment/deductive inference is ampliative. Also see Chapter 1, Sections 6.0–7.0, and Chapter 18, Sections 7.0–7.7. 
 
14.3	“Ought” implies “can”
In other words, if you can’t do it, you have no obligation to do it. If the Earth is about to be hit by a giant meteor, I have no obligation to stop it, since I can’t stop it. If I could, I probably would have such an obligation. But I cannot reasonably be expected to do what doesn’t lie within my power.
Unlike (1) and (2), (3) is at least partly correct—maybe even 100% correct. But there is still some reason to doubt it. Suppose that you give me $10,000 to move some rocks for you. Before I move the rocks, I spend the money. Then, when I try to move the rocks, it turns out I can’t. I’m not strong enough (or my truck doesn’t have enough horse power, or whatever). It still seems that I have an obligation to move the rocks (or to refund the money—but maybe I can no more refund the money than I can move the rocks). In any case, (3) is at least approximately correct.
14.4	Genetic questions must be distinguished from normative questions
Suppose that, as legend has it, Newton came up with the inverse square law (the law that shows how the gravitational attraction between two bodies can be determined on the basis of their masses and the distance between them) as a result of being hit on the head by an apple. The fact that Newton’s hypothesis had such a random and ignominious origin is irrelevant to whether it is correct or not. Whether an idea is correct has to do solely with whether it corresponds to the facts. How it came about, and who came up with it, are totally irrelevant. Of course, if somebody comes up with an idea as a result of a logical process of reasoning, that may make it more likely than not to be correct. But an idea’s being generated in a logical manner isn’t what makes it correct. What makes it correct is its fitting the facts. And ideas that are generated in a logical manner can fail to fit the facts, and ideas that are generated in an illogical manner can fit them perfectly well. Oftentimes, of course, people do judge beliefs correct or otherwise meritorious on the basis, not of how well they fit the facts, but on the basis of how they originated. In making such a judgment, one commits the genetic fallacy.
How does all this relate to morality? Suppose, for argument’s sake, that our ethical views derive from ancient religious beliefs that are no longer held by anyone. Suppose anthropologists discovered that our ethical views on torture (e.g., that torturing infants is wrong) were ultimately derived from a belief that was widely held 500,000 years ago to the effect that the Great Volcano god abhorred infant torture. Would that invalidate our belief that torturing infants is wrong? No. It would show that our grounds for having this belief are not good ones. (In any case, it would show this provided that our original grounds for having it—viz. our beliefs concerning a certain non-existent Volcano god—hadn’t been replaced with other, more logical reasons for believing it.) But people can have very bad grounds for perfectly correct beliefs, and they can have very good grounds for wrong beliefs. So the question “is belief X true?” must at all costs be separated from the question “what is the origin of belief X?”
There is another point of relevance. (This point develops a parenthetical remark made a moment ago.) Oftentimes one’s original reasons for believing something are irrational or, at any rate, less than cogent. There are many reasons why one might believe that the Earth is round. Suppose that 3-year old Tim believes it because he likes the Earth and, since he also likes round objects, he infers that the Earth must be round. That would be a bad reason for believing that the Earth is round. But the belief itself is still correct. And, in due course, Tim may replace his initial, bad reason for having that belief with a good reason. So, on the basis of reliable reportage and astronomical calculations, Tim comes to have a rational basis for having his correct—but previously illegitimately arrived at—belief concerning the shape of the Earth.
This happens a great deal in morality. Many of our moral beliefs are simply forced on us, in the process of our being acculturated. One is punished if one steals, and not punished, and maybe even rewarded, if one doesn’t. The only beliefs that have legitimate foundations are those that are based on evidence and reason; and no belief that one is forced to have, or that one is conditioned to have through a system of punishments and rewards, has such a basis. Nonetheless, those beliefs of ours that result from cultural conditioning sometimes turn out to be justifiable and even correct. So given only that one is coerced or conditioned or even 
 
brainwashed into having a certain moral position, it doesn’t follow that that position is false. (Nor does it follow that it’s correct.) And this is because, as we said earlier, how a belief is arrived at is separate from whether it’s true.
That said, views that are in fact arrived at for reasons having nothing to do with God, religion, or tradition are often claimed to have divine origins. Whenever somebody says that God told them that He wants such and such, we have no way of authenticating such a claim, and no reason to believe it, independently of our preexisting views as to the merits of such and such. So given a case where it is generally believed that God told so and so that x is good (or bad), it’s only because people already had views as to x’s merits that they’re willing to believe that God actually said that to so and so. (If you tell people that God told you to destroy hospitals, nobody will believe you, the reason being that people already believe that destroying hospitals is evil and, therefore, that God wouldn’t say otherwise. If you tell people that God told you to be kind to others, a few people might actually believe you, the reason being that people already believe that being kind to others is good and, therefore, that God might actually say as much.) And those views will in many cases, though not all, be of a logical kind. But, if you convince people that God told you that x must be done, you’ll get a lot more takers than you will if you tell people that your Herculean intellect told it to you. For this reason many supposed instances of the genetic fallacy aren’t instances of it at all.
14.5	Questions concerning the use to which supposed moral truths are put must be separated from questions concerning morality per se
There is no denying that many moral statements are pure propaganda—that they are cynical manipulations the purpose of which is, not to promote the interests of justice, but to advance the private agenda of some nefarious party. Sometimes correct moral statements can be put to evil use. There have been many occasions when, in order to give credibility to some evil program, a politician invoked a legitimate ethical principle. For example, Stalin, in his efforts to become the Supreme Leader of the Soviet Union, often talked about how important it was to have mercy for one’s political rivals. Of course, being merciful is a good thing, but it doesn’t follow that Stalin was doing a good thing in citing that principle. For his citing it was deceptive, even though the vehicle for the deception was a correct (or, at least, a plausible) one.
At the same time, much of what is represented as moral truth is moral falsehood. What people say is right may be wrong, and what they say is wrong may be right. But it doesn’t follow that there’s no moral truth. Given only that what is alleged to be moral truth (e.g., by self-interested actors) isn’t moral truth, it doesn’t follow that there is no moral truth—just as, given that alleged physical laws aren’t always actual physical laws, it doesn’t follow that there are no physical laws.
14.6	Questions concerning morality must be separated from questions concerning the implementation of moral principles
It is often argued that morality has no objective basis, the reason being that, supposedly, it’s a human creation. Why is it thought to be a human creation? Because, we are told, morality came into existence a few thousand years ago. At some point, hominids started regulating their conduct in accordance with moral principles. And it is inferred from this that it was at that point that morality was created. Basically, the argument is that, since there was a time when people started being moral, it follows that morality is a human creation and therefore has no objective basis.
This argument involves two fallacies. There was a time when people first became aware of the fact that the Earth is round; but the Earth was round long before then. Similarly, given only that, at some time, people became aware of moral truths, it doesn’t follow that moral truths were invented at that point. 
 
The other mistake this argument makes is to confuse moral laws with their social implementation. Moral principles are not social rules. Laws in the moral sense are not like laws in the legal sense. There can be no laws in the legal sense in the absence of social institutions. But even in a context where there is no society, it is still wrong to gouge somebody’s eyes out for fun. The social institutions that implement moral principles—that enforce them—obviously came into existence at some point in time and also obviously depend for their existence on human artifice. But it doesn’t follow that moral principles themselves came into existence at that point. It wasn’t until the 1800s that machines (calculators) were built that implemented the laws of arithmetic; but those laws existed long before those machines ever did. So even though those machines are the products of human artifice, it doesn’t follow that the same is true of the principles they implement.
15.0	Some bad reasons to reject ethical realism
There appears to be less agreement in ethics than in other disciplines. From this it is concluded that ethical statements merely express “opinions” that have no objective basis and, consequently, either don’t mean anything or are categorically false.
But there are at least four reasons why this is not good reasoning. (i) There is a great deal of disagreement where strictly factual issues are concerned. (ii) Even though there will be more disagreement in ethics than in other disciplines, that doesn’t show that ethical statements always lack an objective basis; for at least certain kinds of disagreement actually presuppose the existence of objective fact, and there is some evidence that ethical disagreement falls into this category. (iii) There is a great deal of agreement where ethical issues are concerned, the belief to the contrary being based largely on misleading appearances. (iv) Much of the disagreement within ethics concerns matters of fact, as opposed to matters of value.
Let us discuss each of (i)–(iv).
15.1	Discussion of (i)
Consider the statement:

(KV) If Kennedy hadn’t been assassinated, the United States would have pulled out of Vietnam before 1970.

KV is not a valuative statement—it doesn’t express a value-judgment. It affirms the existence of a causal relation. It is to the effect that, for reasons of natural law, one state of affairs (Kennedy’s continuing to be President) would bring about another (the United States’ pulling out of Vietnam before 1970).
It is exceedingly difficult to know whether KV is an accurate statement or not, and I doubt that there is anything approaching unanimity concerning it. But surely it isn’t just a “matter of opinion.”
Further, whether KV is true or not can be rationally debated. This point is crucial. One mark of a statement that is either true or false is that it makes sense to cite reasons for or against it. If I say:

(CB) “chocolate ice cream is better than vanilla,”

there isn’t much I can do to defend my position. (In this context, “better” isn’t intended to mean nutritionally better; for it can be debated whether chocolate ice cream is more nutritious than vanilla.) Of course, I can say “I like chocolate more than I like vanilla.” But that doesn’t provide very much support for my original statement.
KV is not like CB. For one can easily cite reasons for or against KV. One can say, “just prior to being assassinated, JKF wrote a speech that he intended to deliver to Congress explaining why he thought it urgent to pull out of Vietnam.” Or one can say “recently uncovered documents show that, in LBJ’s view, the United States would cease to be a world power if they pulled out of Vietnam; and those documents also show that he and JFK disagreed about this.” And so on. 
 
So, difficult though it may be to adjudicate, KV can be evaluated in terms of its agreement, or lack thereof, with objective facts (e.g., with documents, video footage, people’s memories, etc.).
If a statement’s truth or falsehood is to be established on the basis of objective fact, that strongly suggests that the statement itself is one of fact, as opposed to “mere opinion.” This is because, if a statement stands if the facts are one way and fails if they aren’t that way, then that statement says, or at least implies, that the facts are that way. And, in that case, that statement has factual content.
Bottom line: any position that can be rationally disputed is likely to have an objective basis. KV can be rationally disputed, and that’s why it’s not a matter of “mere opinion.” CB cannot, and that’s why it is a matter of “mere opinion” or “preference.”
15.2	Discussion of (ii)
Can ethical positions be rationally disputed? Yes. Let us suppose that A and B disagree about whether gay marriage is ethical. A would certainly make at least some case for gay marriage if he were to demonstrate that gay marriage, when it exists, is as likely to be based on love as heterosexual marriages. And B would undermine A’s case and would also make a case of his own against gay marriage, if he were to show that, in fact, gay marriages are (or, if they were to exist, would be) less likely than straight marriages to be based on enduring feelings of love. Another way that B could make a case against gay marriage would be to show that, if it were condoned, the result would be a disintegration of practices that are necessary for the continued existence of any society. By the same token, if A could show that gay marriage would not have such a consequence, and that it might actually have the opposite consequence, then A would not only undermine B’s case but would also make a case for gay marriage.
The point is that whether gay marriage is right or wrong depends largely on purely factual issues. The question “would gay marriage, if condoned, lead to the disintegration of social infrastructure?” is a strictly causal question. What it asks is whether a certain cause-effect relation exists. And the question “are gay marriages as likely to be based on enduring feelings of love as heterosexual marriages?” is a question of psychological fact; it is a question that would be of an interest to a psychologist who had no desire at all to make value-judgments. In section (iv), we will provide two additional illustrations of the idea that ethical debates often turn on questions of fact and, for that reason, are themselves questions of fact.
15.3	Discussion of (iii)
Obviously, there are fierce, and also unending, disputes in ethics. Is abortion moral? Was it moral of the United States to go into Iraq? Is corporal punishment moral? These questions may be debated for centuries to come.
But there are many moral matters concerning which there isn’t serious dispute. Is it morally okay to torture babies for the sheer fun of it? No. Is it morally obligatory to give all of one’s money to charity? No. Is it praiseworthy (i.e., morally excellent) to give much of one’s money to charity (when there is no practical incentive to do so)? Yes.
These questions may seem trivial. But, if so, that’s precisely because it is so clear how they are to be answered. The illusion that there is no moral agreement—when, in fact, such agreement is less the exception than the rule—is that an ethical issue isn’t worth discussing anymore if there is universal agreement about it. For this reason, the only ethical issues that are worth discussing are the ones that haven’t been solved, giving rise to the misleading appearance that there is no ethical agreement.
15.4	Discussion of (iv)
Nonetheless, I wouldn’t go so far as to deny that there is more disagreement in ethics than in most other disciplines. Nor would I deny that the basis of the disagreement is deeper. But, so far as that is true, it isn’t because there are no ethical facts; it is because, in ethical discussions, people often shy away from making it 100% clear what, precisely, they are arguing for. 
 
When we were discussing (i), we saw that if it is possible to cite reasons for or against a viewpoint, then that viewpoint, if correct, has an objective basis. If you know that Smith murdered Jones, then you are able to provide reasons why I should believe you. Maybe you can show me video footage of Smith doing the deed. Maybe you can remind me of how often Smith fumed about Jones. Maybe you can show me legal documents that make it clear that Smith stood to make a lot of money if Jones died.
By this reasoning, if the merits of ethical positions can be rationally disputed, then it is probable that ethical positions, when correct, have an objective basis. So can ethical positions be rationally debated? Can one cite reasons for and against them?
Yes. We saw this a moment ago when discussing marriage. Here is another example. Is the death penalty right or wrong? People disagree about this. But even among those who disagree, there is considerable debate as to what would have to hold in order for the death penalty to be justified. So, for example, if it were made clear that the death penalty systematically led to the execution of innocent people, then most people would agree that the death penalty was not right. The question “how many innocent people are executed for crimes they didn’t commit?” is a strictly factual question. And a lot of the debate over the ethical integrity of death penalty depends on how this strictly factual question is answered. 
Suppose it turned out that the death penalty made governments less likely to invest in social policies that would prevent the commission of capital offences in the first place. In that case, the vast majority of people who now support the death penalty as justified would probably cease to do so. (Of course, there would be a few holdouts. But that doesn’t mean anything. There are still people who think the Earth is flat.) It is a strictly factual question of whether the death penalty inhibits, encourages, or is neutral with respect to the implementation of policies that discourage the commission of murder and other capital offenses. So, as before, we see that, to the extent that it’s hard to decide whether the death penalty is good or bad, that’s because certain purely factual issues are hard to decide (e.g., it’s hard to know exactly what sociological effects the death penalty has). So the seemingly unending nature of this ethical debate has to do, not with there being no fact of the matter, but with there being relevant facts that aren’t yet in evidence.
Another example: It’s fiercely debated whether abortion is moral or immoral. But notice that the debate often turns on questions of fact. Does the fetus have a mind? Can it feel pain? Does it, at some level, feel an attachment to its mother and would it consequently feel an extreme sense of betrayal were it to find out that it was in the process of being aborted? These are factual questions about the fetus’s psychological state (or lack thereof). And I think that many (though probably not all) pro-choicers, were they to find out that fetuses clearly had minds would change their position. By the same token, many pro-lifers would change their minds were they to find out that fetuses clearly had no minds at all and were not otherwise comparable to bona fide human beings. When pro-lifers are asked to defend their view, they do so by citing (supposed) evidence that aborted fetuses have minds and, in particular, can feel both emotional and physical pain during the act of abortion. And when pro-choicers are asked to defend their position, they cite (supposed) evidence that fetuses don’t have the neural wherewithal to have minds. So, while there is no denying that the debate over the merits of abortion has a more incessant, and also bitter, quality than debates about the structure of the hydrogen atom, much of the debate over abortion, and possibly all of it, does seem to turn on strictly factual questions.
16.0	What are ethical truths?
We’re not in a position to answer this question right now. (An answer to this question is proposed and defended in Chapter 22.) But the points just made may point us in the right general direction.
We just saw that ethical contentions often have a heavy, albeit implicit, factual component. This suggests that ethical assertions are factual assertions, albeit disguised ones.
This view has been taken. According to one version of it, which is known as “utilitarianism,” good things are those that bring about happiness and bad things are those that diminish happiness. (Not the happiness of any one person, but the happiness of everybody.) So a utilitarian would say universal health care is morally good if it increases happiness, morally bad if it decreases it, and morally neutral if it does neither.
We’ll discuss utilitarianism in Chapter 24. But a couple of points about it are relevant in this context. First, it can’t be all wrong.  It’s hard to believe that something that made everybody miserable would be good
 
or that something that made everybody happy would be bad. The question “does x make people happier, unhappier, or neither?” is a strictly factual question. Whether Smith is happy or not has nothing to do with my opinion or anyone else’s. (It doesn’t even have to do with Smith’s opinion. His opinion is more likely to be accurate, than other people’s, but if it’s correct, that’s because it’s rooted in the relevant facts. In fact, Smith’s opinion as to whether he was happy wouldn’t be more likely to be accurate than anyone else’s if it were just a “matter of opinion” whether he were happy or not.) The question “how happy is so and so, if at all?” is a strictly factual question, and ethical judgments are not a “matter of opinion” if utilitarianism is correct.
According to another view, for something to be good is for it to be identical with, or logically required by, a practice on which human flourishing depends. By “human flourishing” is meant the actualization of human abilities. So, according to the view in question, if you have an innate talent for writing fiction, then you are flourishing insofar as you are putting that talent to use and failing to flourish insofar as you are not. It’s a question of fact whether so and so is putting his innate musical ability to good use. Given any creature and any inborn ability on its part, it’s a question of fact to what extent, if any, it’s using that ability. And it’s a question of fact to what extent a given act on your part or anybody else’s promotes or thwarts the expression of inborn ability. So if the just-descried moral view is correct, moral questions are factual questions. “Is x good?” is identical with the question “does x promote or thwart the development of people’s abilities?” 
ENDNOTES
